A major issue of contention in the current election is trying to figure out what actually happened in last year’s election, as well as why the first election this year was invalidated. Full disclosure: even us at YouQ are still slightly confused by the explanation given by each party as to what happened. However, we’ll do our best to piece together what information we’ve gathered in order to give what we think is the clearest view of what happened in the previous two elections.
In late July 2012, Fresh held a council meeting which brought about a number of changes to the election regulations- making it possible for a previously held party name to be registered by anyone who wished to use it. Additionally, they banned the use of the word ‘voucher’ in the name (there was a registered party called ‘I Just Want My Voucher’) as well as banning parties from registering a name that held the name of another party (there was a party at the time called ‘Fresher Spread’). These regulation changes were posted in the Union offices, however, only Fresh members were allegedly able to gain access- meaning the other parties were unaware of the change in rules.
As well as changing regulations pertaining to party names, Fresh also passed a rule allowing for both election calls and nominations to be done at the same time. This meant that once elections were called, opposing parties had to scramble to get members together in order to organize their ticket. Pulse and I Just Want My Voucher were able to get a ticket together, but were however rejected by the Returning Officer (election overseer) when lodged. This was because a) the name ‘Pulse’ had already been registered by another party and b) because the word ‘voucher’ was banned- apparently because the word denotes the idea of gain for voting, according to Fresh. The party ‘Fresher Spread’ were too rejected because their name contained the word ‘Fresh’.
The real controversy started around this point, as it became apparent that the people who were now running under the name ‘Pulse’ had no affiliation with the original Pulse (which will be referred to as ‘Pulse 2011’ for the remainder of this article). It was widely believed that Pulse was actually a split-off of Fresh, and merely a ploy to make people think there were two parties running. According to Fresh, this new Pulse was formed by an angry ex-Pulse 2011 member, who registered the name. According to Reform however, Fresh did in fact steal Pulse 2011’s name and ran a ticket to pretend there was an opposition party.
When the electoral regulations were finally released to the public, all other political parties withdrew from the election in protest , creating boycott campagin ‘Democracy 4 UQU’. Democracy 4 UQU submitted referendum to the union signed by 3000 students which was however rejected because the wording ‘wasn’t constitutional language’, and therefore invalid.
This brings us to this year’s election. Democracy 4 UQU has now split into two parties- Reform and Student Action (Fuck Fresh). Lift is a separate entity founded by a former Fresh member. The controversy surrounding Lift is that they allegedly invalidated the election in order to get themselves a chance at being on the above the line ballot. This is untrue according to Lift, explaining they were not above the line in the first election because three of their Ipswich campus members had not been seconded correctly, meaning they were not properly nominated. This dropped Lift below the line. The other parties have claimed that this is where Lift didn’t fill out their forms correctly.
As for how the election was invalidated, in order to have an election there must be a Returning Officer nominated. Jared (Lift president) was one of the Vice Presidents who was required to attend a meeting in order to appoint the Returning Officer. Jared, however, did not attend this meeting, claiming he had no knowledge of it. He believes that Fresh didn’t want him there because they knew he wanted to run against them. The fact Jared wasn’t there meant that the attendee requirements to elect a returning officer were not met. This, in turn, meant that the appointment of the returning officer was invalid- therefore invalidating the entire election process.
Hopefully this article gives you, the voter, some idea as to what actually happened in the last two elections. We apologise for the long-winded nature of our explanation, but there is simply no short way to summarise the complicated mess which was the last two student union elections.

After 2 months of campaigning and controversy, the results are finally in- Reform have won the UQ Student Union Elections! With all the votes counted, Reform swept in to a comfortable victory, collecting 7276 votes to Lift’s 4830, Fresh’s 3714 and Student Action’s 594. This brings to an end the six year reign of Fresh, whose last few years in power were characterised with allegations of corruption and mismanagement of student funds. With Reform to assume power at the commencement of next semester, what changes can we, the students, expect?
Reform’s key running platform was that of electoral reform and transparency, altering union regulations to allow for a third party organisation to scrutinise the entire election process. This is being introduced in order to avoid what occurred in the 2012, in which Fresh were alleged to have rigged the election. Reform are also introducing a greater level of accountability and transparency when it comes to how the union spends its money.
Reform also plan to introduce a number of policies designed to improve student life at UQ. These include: ending Saturday exams, improving Eduroam, counter course guides and increased support service visibility. On top of this Reform also plan to increase support for clubs and societies, introduce a free weekly breakfast, a new union-owned food outlet and more market days.

The University of Queensland, in partnership with BDO, launched an audit at the beginning of the year into claims of misconduct by the 2012 UQ union. In particular, the audit focused on claims relating to perceived misconduct during the 2012 elections, as well as misuse of student funds whilst in power. These findings relate to the post made a few weeks ago relating to what we gathered occurred during the last election. With the audit results finally available for public access, we will be able to ascertain whether the allegations made against the Fresh-run administration correlate with what the auditors discovered.
The audit is incredibly comprehensive- covering every aspect of the election and Fresh’s tenure. As such, this post will only be addressing the audit’s findings on the main points covered in the previous post made about the 2012 election. The key allegations referenced were:
 The change in electoral regulations relating to party names and the perceived underhand manner in which this occurred, with opposing parties not being made aware of the changes.
The misuse of student funds, particularly in relation to expenditure of $63 983.70 on Fresh merchandise.
In relation to the changes in electoral regulations, the auditors found that the changes made in relation to the reservation of party names was made within the scope of the UQ union constitution. However, the UQU has agreed to undertake a process of providing no less than a week’s notice of meetings where any amendments to regulations are being proposed. The UQU also agreed to ‘enhance the manner in which communication and notification of such meetings are made to members, including electronically, to further enhance transparency’.
In response to public consensus over the reservation of party names, the UQU has agreed to review the regulations related to the registration and reservation of names. It is important to note that the UQU response given in this audit is coming from the Fresh-run administration, so it is possible that the responses offered in the audit will not be undertaken. However, as UQU incumbent Reform’s main running platform was that of electoral reform and transparency, it is reasonable to expect that these responses will be carried out.
In relation to the expenditure of student funds, the auditors made no specific findings or recommendations. However, they did openly note that the the UQU spent $63 983.70 on materials co-branded with the ‘UQU’ and ‘Fresh’ logos. The union response to this can be considered relatively positive. It was agreed upon that UQU policy should be tightened in regards to co-branding, both inside and outside the election period. Whilst the UQU claim that the co-branding of UQU was done in ‘good faith’, it accepted that it would be preferable if this was no longer permitted in order ‘to avoid the controversy that has taken place recurring’. It is indicated in the response that the UQU would support changes prohibiting co-branding and the use of UQU property by election candidates.
Whilst we at YouQ agree that these measures are positive, the Fresh-run administration’s response could be interpreted as hypocritical. Considering the administration giving this positive response to the prohibition of co-branding is the same one that was guilty of using union property and co-branding during it’s election campaign only 6 months previously, it does bring the UQU’s sincerity and reliability into question. Nevertheless, it will be fascinating to see if Reform or Student Action (Fuck Fresh) make any response to the release of the union results. Reform and Student Action (Fuck Fresh) campaigned heavily against Fresh’s perceived mismanagement and un-democratic practices, and as this audit largely puts Fresh in the clear, it will be interesting to see if any statements made by either Reform or Fresh are called into question.

In order to give you, the voters, a better idea of which party you support, we decided to visualize each of the 4 party’s policies in the form of a Venn diagram. In showing which policies the various parties share or have unique to themselves, you should hopefully have a better idea of what each party offers, allowing you to make an informed decision when voting this week. All information on policy was retrieved from the four parties’ flyers and Facebook pages.